<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
			<p>From that Fast of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Peter, that memorable trip to the Fair, Tikhon Ilitch began to drink frequently⁠—not to the point of downright drunkenness, but to the stage at which his face became passably red. This did not, however, interfere in the slightest degree with his business, and, according to his own account, it did not interfere with his health. “Vodka polishes the blood,” he was wont to remark; and, truth to tell, to all appearances he became more robust than ever. Not infrequently now he called his life that of a galley-slave⁠—the hangman’s noose⁠—a gilded cage. But he strode along his pathway with ever-increasing confidence, paying no attention to the condition of the weather or the road. Commonplace, uneventful days ruled supreme in his house, and several years passed in such monotonous fashion that everything merged together into one long working-day. But certain new, vast events which no one had looked for came to pass⁠—the war with Japan and the revolution.</p>
			<p>The rumours concerning the war began, of course, with bragging. “The kazaks will soon flay his yellow skin off him, brother!” But it smouldered so very short a time, this pale image of former boasts! A different sort of talk speedily made itself heard.</p>
			<p>“We have more land than we can manage!” said Tikhon Ilitch, in the stern tone of an expert⁠—probably for the first time in the whole course of his life not referring to his own land in Durnovka, but to the whole expanse of Russia. “ ’Tis not war, sir, but downright madness!”</p>
			<p>Another thing made itself felt, the sort of thing which has prevailed from time immemorial⁠—the inclination to take the winning side. And the news about the frightful defeats of the Russian army excited his enthusiasm: “Ukh, that’s fine. Curse them, the brutes!” He waxed enthusiastic also over the conquests of the revolution, over the assassinations: “That Minister got a smashing blow!” said Tikhon Ilitch occasionally, in the fire of his ecstasy. “He got such a good one that not even his ashes were left!”</p>
			<p>But his uneasiness increased, too. As soon as any discussion connected with the land came up, his wrath awoke. “ ’Tis all the work of the Jews! Of the Jews, and of those frowzy long-haired fellows, the students!” What irritated Tikhon Ilitch worst of all was, that the son of the deacon in Ulianovka, a student in the Theological Seminary who was hanging around without work and living on his father, called himself a Social-Democrat. And the whole situation was incomprehensible. Everybody was talking about the revolution, the Revolution, while round about everything was going on the same as ever, in the ordinary everyday fashion: the sun shone, the rye blossomed in the fields, the carts wended their way to the station. The populace were incomprehensible in their taciturnity, in the evasiveness of their talk.</p>
			<p>“They’re an underhand lot, the populace! They fairly scare one with their slyness!” said Tikhon Ilitch. And, forgetting the Jews, he added: “Let us assume that not all that music is craft. Changing the government and evening up the shares of land⁠—why, an infant could understand that, sir. And, naturally, ’tis perfectly clear to whom they will pay court⁠—that populace, sir. But, of course, they hold their tongues. And, of course, we must watch, and try to meet their humour, so that they may go on holding their tongues. We must put a spoke in their wheel! If you don’t, look out for yourself: they’ll scent success, they’ll get wind of the fact that they’ve got the breeching under their tail⁠—and they’ll smash things to smithereens, sir!”</p>
			<p>When he read or heard that land was to be taken from only such as possessed more than five hundred <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">desyatini</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> he himself became an “agitator.” He even entered into disputes with the Durnovka people. This is the sort of thing that would happen:⁠—</p>
			<p>A peasant stood alongside Tikhon Ilitch’s shop; the man had bought vodka at the railway station, dried salt fish and cracknels at the shop, and had doffed his cap; but he prolonged his enjoyment, and said:</p>
			<p>“No, Tikhon Ilitch, ’tis no use your explaining. It can be taken, at a just price. But not the way you say⁠—that’s no good.”</p>
			<p>An odour arose from the pine boards piled up near the granary, opposite the yard. The dried fish and the linden bast on which the cracknels were strung had an irritating smell. The hot locomotive of the freight-train could be heard hissing and getting up steam beyond the trees, behind the buildings of the railway station. Tikhon Ilitch stood bareheaded beside his shop, screwing up his eyes and smiling slyly. Smilingly he made reply:</p>
			<p>“Bosh! But what if he is not a master, but a tramp?”</p>
			<p>“Who? The noble owner, you mean?”</p>
			<p>“No⁠—a lowborn man.”</p>
			<p>“Well, that’s a different matter. ’Tis no sin to take it from such a man, with all his innards to boot!”</p>
			<p>“Well now, that’s exactly the point!”</p>
			<p>But another rumour reached them: the land would be taken from those who owned less than five hundred <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">desyatini</i>! And immediately his soul was assailed by preoccupation, suspicion, irritability. Everything that was done in the house began to seem abhorrent.</p>
			<p>Egorka, the assistant, brought flour-sacks out of the shop and began to shake them. And the man’s head reminded him of the head of the town fool, “Duck-Headed Matty.” The crown of his head ran up to a point, his hair was harsh and thick⁠—“Now, why is it that fools have such thick hair?”⁠—his forehead was sunken, his face resembled an oblique egg, he had protruding eyes, and his eyelids, with their calf-like lashes, seemed drawn tightly over them; it looked as if there were not enough skin⁠—if he were to close his eyes, his mouth would fly open of necessity, and if he closed his mouth, he would be compelled to open his eyes very wide. And Tikhon Ilitch shouted spitefully: “Babbler! Blockhead! What are you shaking your head at me for?”</p>
			<p>The cook brought out a smallish box, opened it, placed it upside down on the ground, and began to thump the bottom with her fist. And, understanding what that meant, Tikhon Ilitch slowly shook his head: “Akh, you housewife, curse you! You’re knocking out the cockroaches?”</p>
			<p>“There’s a regular cloud of them in there!” replied the cook gaily. “When I peeped in⁠—Lord, what a sight!”</p>
			<p>And, gritting his teeth, Tikhon Ilitch walked out to the highway and gazed long at the rolling plain, in the direction of Durnovka.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
