<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TEXT <a href="FILENAME.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_1_1"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_1_1"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> A verst is two-thirds of a mile.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_2_2"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_2_2"><span class="label">[2]</span></a> This muddling of “Emir of Bukhara” is only one example of the ignorant combinations and locutions used by the peasant characters.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_3_3"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_3_3"><span class="label">[3]</span></a> A play on words, “tar” in the second sentence meaning “liquor.”⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_4_4"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_4_4"><span class="label">[4]</span></a> “Matushka” and “batiushka” (literally, “Little Mother” and “Little Father”) are the characteristic Russian formula for addressing elderly strangers, regardless of class distinctions.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_5_5"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_5_5"><span class="label">[5]</span></a> A desyatina is a unit of land measurement equalling 2.07 acres.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_6_6"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_6_6"><span class="label">[6]</span></a> When a man or woman begins to get on in the world his admiring neighbours signalize their appreciation by adding to the Christian name the patronymic, as if the clever one were of gentle (noble) birth. In this story, Tikhon soon receives the public acknowledgment of success, having begun as plain “Tikhon.” Peasant-fashion, “Nikititch” was transmuted into “Mikititch.”⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_7_7"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_7_7"><span class="label">[7]</span></a> Sharpers who pretend to be the poverty-stricken descendants of the Tatar Princes who ruled Kazan before it was conquered, during the rein of Ivan the Terrible.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_8_8"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_8_8"><span class="label">[8]</span></a> A straight, loose gown, falling from the armpits, worn by unmarried girls.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_9_9"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_9_9"><span class="label">[9]</span></a> A heretic. Literally, one who drinks milk (moloko) during the Fasts in defiance to the Orthodox Catholic Church.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_10_10"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_10_10"><span class="label">[10]</span></a> Probably a deliberate bit of insolence, as he must have known that the patronymic was “Ilitch,” not “Fomitch.”⁠—<small>TRANS</small>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_11_11"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_11_11"><span class="label">[11]</span></a> All priests and monks in the Orthodox Catholic Church wear the hair and beard long. Tikhon Ilitch refers to the superstition that it portends bad luck to meet an ecclesiastic when one is arranging something or going somewhere.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_12_12"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_12_12"><span class="label">[12]</span></a> Polu, meaning “half,” reduces the name to absurdity: something like “the Half-carp.”⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_13_13"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_13_13"><span class="label">[13]</span></a> Referring to a famous Philaret, Metropolitan of Moscow.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_14_14"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_14_14"><span class="label">[14]</span></a> The insulting nickname “khokhly” is used. The question mentioned is in the form of a rhyme, intentionally offensive. The reply is also rhymed.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_15_15"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_15_15"><span class="label">[15]</span></a> That is, to the heart of the Kremlin, in Moscow.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_16_16"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_16_16"><span class="label">[16]</span></a> A sect which denies the divinity of the Holy Spirit. They emigrated from the Caucasus to British Columbia in the ’90’s, with money furnished by Count L. N. Tolstoy, and have had many conflicts with the British authorities.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_17_17"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_17_17"><span class="label">[17]</span></a> The Little Russian nickname for the Great Russians.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_18_18"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_18_18"><span class="label">[18]</span></a> Yaroslaff the Great, son of Prince Vladimir, 1016⁠–⁠1054.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_19_19"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_19_19"><span class="label">[19]</span></a> A Turkish tribe which migrated from Asia to Eastern Europe. They came into collision with the Russians at the end of the ninth century and the beginning of the tenth.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_20_20"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_20_20"><span class="label">[20]</span></a> A Lavra is a first-class Monastery. Here it refers to the famous “Catacombs” Monastery.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_21_21"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_21_21"><span class="label">[21]</span></a> Muromtzeff.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_22_22"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_22_22"><span class="label">[22]</span></a> A rhyme in the original. The “catskinner” collects hides throughout the countryside, for conversion into “furs.”⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_23_23"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_23_23"><span class="label">[23]</span></a> About three-quarters of a yard of heavy homespun crash is wrapped over the foot and leg in lieu of a stocking, and confined in place by the stout cord or rope with which the slippers of plaited linden bark are tied on.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_24_24"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_24_24"><span class="label">[24]</span></a> Popular form of “Witte,” the famous Minister.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_25_25"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_25_25"><span class="label">[25]</span></a> A member of the self-mutilating sect, the Skoptzy.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_26_26"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_26_26"><span class="label">[26]</span></a> Parish clergy are always married men in the Orthodox Catholic Church. An Archpriest is usually the head of a staff of clergy at a Cathedral. To a higher post and title no married priest can attain. The Bishops, Archbishops, and higher clergy must be monks.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_27_27"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_27_27"><span class="label">[27]</span></a> “Bratushki”⁠—Little Brothers⁠—is a term which originated during the Russo-Turkish War, 1877⁠–⁠78, and was applied to the Serbs and Bulgarians.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_28_28"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_28_28"><span class="label">[28]</span></a> Easter.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_29_29"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_29_29"><span class="label">[29]</span></a> Scarecrow.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_30_30"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_30_30"><span class="label">[30]</span></a> 2.70 gallons.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_31_31"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_31_31"><span class="label">[31]</span></a> Not Extreme Unction, in the meaning of the Church of Rome. In the Orthodox Catholic Church it is a service of Prayer and Anointment for healing, to be administered and received at any time desired.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_32_32"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_32_32"><span class="label">[32]</span></a> Thus manufacturing a family name out of “<i>Mys</i>,” a promontory.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_33_33"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_33_33"><span class="label">[33]</span></a> Thirty-six pounds.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_34_34"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_34_34"><span class="label">[34]</span></a> The Little Kettle.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_35_35"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_35_35"><span class="label">[35]</span></a> The Trebnik contains the Services for events in daily life: Baptism, Marriage, Confession, the Burial Rites, and so forth. What Tikhon Ilitch quotes and reads is from the magnificent Burial Service. See the Service Book of the Holy Orthodox-Catholic Apostolic Church.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_36_36"/><a class="pginternal" href="#FNanchor_36_36"><span class="label">[36]</span></a> In the marriage service crowns are used for bride and groom, but generally they are held a short distance above the heads, by best men standing behind.⁠—<small>TRANS.</small></p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
